# SubSurfaceMLNavigator
Geological Inference Through Displacement-Distance Profile Guided by Machine Learning. 

This study presents a comprehensive overview of the process of developing the optimal machine learning (ML) models for predicting the fault length, distance from a reference point (in this study on the upper tip of the fault), maximum displacement and displacement-distance profile pattern for selected thrust structure along vertical sections from coalmine dataset. The methodology consists of a chain of multi-ML model techniques, including the development of ML models, selection of input features, splitting of the data, exploring the data, optimisation of the training process, evaluating the performance of the models, and application of practical examples. For this purpose, eight ML models, i.e., linear regression, decision trees, random forests, lasso (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator), ridge regression, elastic net, light GBM regressor and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), were tested to predict the fault length, distance from a reference point and maximum displacement based on a database of 110 faults with 930 samples with five input features. Moreover, five models, i.e., K nearest neighbour (KNN), decision trees, support vector machine (SVM), logistic regression and random forests, were trained to classify the displacement-distance profile pattern of the thrusts under investigation. Furthermore, the study splits the dataset into training, validation and testing sets (90, 10, 10 faults) to evaluate the robustness of the ML models. These ML models were then considered to evaluate the training and validation sets presenting the prediction performance in histogram plots. The results proved that the four best models (three Random forests and one Decision Tree) are the most reliable and accurate ML models for predicting the four attributes of the fault. The best-performing Random Forest model achieved accuracy in predicting fault length, yielding R-squared values of 0.8832 and 0.8825 and associated MAE values of 327 and 325, along with RMSE values of 565 and 561 on the validation and testing sets, respectively. Additionally, the Decision Tree model, designed for distance prediction from the reference point, exhibited performance with R-squared values of 0.8890 and 0. 9440 and MAE values of 82 on the validation set and 76 on the testing set, accompanied by RMSE values of 181 and 195, respectively. The Random Forest model demonstrated predictive power when estimating maximum displacement, boasting R-squared values of 0.9490 and 0.9172, MAE values of 27 and 74, and RMSE values of 50 and 145 on the validation and testing sets, respectively. In contrast, the Random Forest Classifier model excelled in identifying displacement-distance profile patterns, achieving accuracy rates of 0.80 on both the validation and testing sets, precision rates of 0.82 and 0.70, and Recall rates of 0.87 and 0.75, respectively. These four models collectively aim to provide an illustrative displacement-distance plot and its associated subsurface fault conceptual model, offering interpretational guidance that incorporates crucial details such as lithology, reading location on the fault, and classification of uncertainty. We claim that this comprehensive workflow, integrating regression and classification ML models, serves as a practical first-step interpretation guide from displacement-distance profiles.
